# useEffect: persistent state

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

Elaborate on your learnings here in `src/exercise/02.md`

My active recall notes after finishing the lesson:

So, basically this exercise was about using useEffect and useState along w/
localStorage in order to do a typical use-case with useState, but this time have
that value persist in localStorage. Interestingly, the idea is simple but there
are a lot of edge cases to consider, some of which never even crossed my mind.
One edge-case problem that didn't cross my mind is that JSON.parse() will
understandably give an error if the string you give it is not a valid JSON
string.

Probably the most helpful things I learned here is:

- I get custom hooks now. And I'm actually even starting to get real comfortable
  w/ 'em I feel.
- Persisting state to localStorage has a lot of gotchas & edge-cases to watch
  out for.
- Probably most helpful: Custom hooks are literally just normal JS functions w/
  hooks inside of them.
- Being able to extract your stateful/effectful logic into a custom hook for use
  in other places are the main reason for adding hooks.
- While custom hooks are obviously intentional, custom hooks aren't actually a
  feature the React team explicitly added. Having an extracted function w/ hooks
  in it (AKA a custom hook) work as you would expect is a normal consequence of
  how js works.
  - And this really suits their focus on less API surface area & just more js.
- Another nicely helpful one: Kent's view on effects seems to be that they allow
  us to communicate w/ & change the outer world (which could be a backend server
  or localStorage, etc.) It's a good mneumonic I think. Makes me think of my
  non-pure function mneumonic of a black box that is zapping the outside world
  w/ electricity.
- The dependency array in useEffect does a shallow comparison of the array w/
  the past array from the last render cycle. This means that each pair of
  corresponding elements in the array is compared w/ the normal === or .is()
  equality check, and if every element checks out then the useEffect callback
  doesn't run. This means that objects in the deps array will never be
  considered equal (even if they have the same contents) unless the objects
  being compared happen to have the same reference.

## Background

`React.useEffect` is a built-in hook that allows you to run some custom code
after React renders (and re-renders) your component to the DOM. It accepts a
callback function which React will call after the DOM has been updated:

```javascript
React.useEffect(() => {
  // your side-effect code here.
  // this is where you can make HTTP requests or interact with browser APIs.
})
```

Feel free to take a look at `src/examples/hook-flow.png` if you're interested in
the timing of when your functions are run. This will make more sense after
finishing the exercises/extra credit/instruction.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/02.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.js)

In this exercise, we're going to enhance our `<Greeting />` component to get its
initial state value from localStorage (if available) and keep localStorage
updated as the `name` is updated.

## Extra Credit

### 1. ðŸ’¯ lazy state initialization

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-1.js)

Right now, every time our component function is run, our function reads from
localStorage. This is problematic because it could be a performance bottleneck
(reading from localStorage can be slow). And what's more we only actually need
to know the value from localStorage the first time this component is rendered!
So the additional reads are wasted effort.

To avoid this problem, React's useState hook allows you to pass a function
instead of the actual value, and then it will only call that function to get the
state value when the component is rendered the first time. So you can go from
this: `React.useState(someExpensiveComputation())` To this:
`React.useState(() => someExpensiveComputation())`

And the `someExpensiveComputation` function will only be called when it's
needed!

Make the `React.useState` call use lazy initialization to avoid a performance
bottleneck of reading into localStorage on every render.

> Learn more about
> [lazy state initialization](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/use-state-lazy-initialization-and-function-updates)

### 2. ðŸ’¯ effect dependencies

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-2.js)

The callback we're passing to `React.useEffect` is called after _every_ render
of our component (including re-renders). This is exactly what we want because we
want to make sure that the `name` is saved into localStorage whenever it
changes, but there are various reasons a component can be re-rendered (for
example, when a parent component in the application tree gets re-rendered).

Really, we _only_ want localStorage to get updated when the `name` state
actually changes. It doesn't need to re-run any other time. Luckily for us,
`React.useEffect` allows you to pass a second argument called the "dependency
array" which signals to React that your effect callback function should be
called when (and only when) those dependencies change. So we can use this to
avoid doing unnecessary work!

Add a dependencies array for `React.useEffect` to avoid the callback being
called too frequently.

### 3. ðŸ’¯ custom hook

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-3.js)

The best part of hooks is that if you find a bit of logic inside your component
function that you think would be useful elsewhere, you can put that in another
function and call it from the components that need it (just like regular
JavaScript). These functions you create are called "custom hooks".

Create a custom hook called `useLocalStorageState` for reusability of all this
logic.

### 4. ðŸ’¯ flexible localStorage hook

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/02.extra-4.js)

Take your custom `useLocalStorageState` hook and make it generic enough to
support any data type (remember, you have to serialize objects to strings... use
`JSON.stringify` and `JSON.parse`). Go wild with this!

## Notes

If you'd like to learn more about when different hooks are called and the order
in which they're called, then open up `src/examples/hook-flow.png` and
`src/examples/hook-flow.js`. Play around with that a bit and hopefully that will
help solidify this for you. Note that understanding this isn't absolutely
necessary for you to understand hooks, but it _will_ help you in some situations
so it's useful to understand.

> PLEASE NOTE: there was a subtle change in the order of cleanup functions
> getting called in React 17:
> https://github.com/kentcdodds/react-hooks/issues/90

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=02%3A%20useEffect%3A%20persistent%20state&em=jaquinoemail%40gmail.com).
